---
layout: post
title: "Social Media and the Future of Private Data"
date: 2019-04-23
excerpt: "Social media has changed the landscape of private data. How this does impact our lives and the lives of people around us?"
tags: ["Senior Seminar","Ethics"]
comments: true
---
Social media has changed how information travels in the world. There is a constant stream of data and metadata that exists now because of social media. Information travels from one part of the world to another in an instant, and it is easy to find out what's happening in someone's life and keep updated with them without meeting them for years. While social media is excellent for keeping in touch with people, users need to remind themselves that these platforms generate money by collecting and sharing user data. Ad revenue is huge. The personal data, individual likes and dislikes can provide great insight into a person's life, and this insight can be used to target ads. Targetted and personalized ads have an exponentially higher chance of converting into a success user click.

The issue that bothers me about the whole social media wave is about informed consent. Social media platforms are collecting an incredible amount of data. While users do sign the terms and conditions of each platform and app, it is rarely the case that someone reads through all the terms. It is the users' responsibility to do so, but given the legal jargon and the fact that everyone believes that they are not going to get hacked, it creates a problem that is more ethical than legal. Users location is collected, their preference on topics, their likes and their interaction with other people can all be used to construct a digital persona of a person which can be quite accurate. Facebook has started to be more strict about what user data they let app developers access, but before Cambridge Analytica, it was quite easy to access anyone's data with a simple application or *personality quiz*. Many data breaches have taken place. There have been several scandals, but social media data breaches are very different from usual data breaches. While normal data breaches usually compromise a user account and at max cause financial damage which has much protection for the users, leaking of social media leads to a person's life being released. The same options aren't available. There can be irreparable damage which one cannot recover from. The rule of thumb should be "Also assume that whatever you post online, your future employer or anyone, in general, will have access to."
